CORS-3687: Enhancement proposal for setting EIPs for Ingress Controller via installer (#1688)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/aws-lb-eip-selection.md

cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

For installer-created-VPCs, a cluster admin can accurately predict how many EIPAllocations to bring so their cluster doesn't fail to install as follows as they might not 
know what public subnets will be created by the openshift-installer.

To illustrate further, the workflow could start like:

1. Cluster admin wants to use EIPs, but isn't bringing their own VPC, so they need to know exactly how many EIPs to create.
2. Cluster admin should review https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/ to find out how many AZs are in the region they are installing into.
3. Cluster admin should use the same number of EIPs as AZs in their region.

#### Configuring EIP for the default IngressController at installation time:
1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds their domain, lbType to NLB, AWS region, and EIP allocation ids.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:
    region: <AWS region>
    lbType: NLB
    ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:

>       eipAllocations:

Reviewer: We discussed this change somewhere, and looks like the installer proposal[1] follows that logic: 

Considering BYO EIP can be expanded to installer re-use EIPs when installing a cluster, the install-config API change in this PR suggests to add the field `platfor.aws.eipAllocations`, introducing now the list `ingressNetworkLoadBalancer` to cover the Ingress Controller needs, but allowing expansion:
```diff
-    ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:
-      eipAllocations:
+    eipAllocations:
+      ingressNetworkLoadBalancer
```

should we need to update the EP?

cc @patrickdillon 

[1] https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/8204/files#diff-ee27061f49f3641fa1c082879a6f0005c8986ece0519c3e286d91ae5a32947d8R2606-R2644

Reviewer 2: It seems like that would be more accurate, but no one is working on this anymore. I will defer to @candita about how following up on this work should be handled.

    3. The cluster ingress operator watches the resource and then creates a `default` `IngressController` by:
        1. creating an `default` `IngressController` from the `default` `Ingress Controller CR` created by the installer.
        2. then scaling a deployment for the `IngressController` CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations`.
        3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
           which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of `IngressController` CR.

#### Field Validation

##### Validation on installer when installing in managed VPC (full-automated) based in the discovered zones used to create the cluster.
   Add a function to the installer code to  compare the number of Availability Zones in the region to the number of eipAllocations passed in the `install-config.yaml`.   This is required because the cluster will select one subnet per AZ, so the number of EIPs must be equal to the number of subnets.

##### The number of public subnets must match the number of `eipAllocations` in an unmanaged VPC (BYO VPC)

>      We will be comparing if the number of public subnets added to the install-config matches with len(eipAllocations).

Reviewer 3: See https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/8204#discussion_r1876602038, it's not quite this simple of a comparison.

To mitigate this we could add that validation, at least on installer, to provide quick-feedback (fail when validate install-config) to the user when the provided EIP is already associated to another resource.
It would be nice to have a validation before setting the annotation to CCM, keeping the operator Degraded before disrupting the service.

##### EIP Allocation Defaulting Mechanics for Ingress Controller
Traditionally, the Ingress Operator has populated default values from the Ingress Config into the `status`, 
making `status` effectively reflect the desired state of the IngressController. However, since 
`eipAllocations` in `status` represents the **actual** state, not the **desired** state, the default 
`eipAllocations` values must be set in the `spec` when the Ingress Operator initially admits the 
IngressController.
This approach is new. The Ingress Operator does not typically set default values in `spec` for load balancer
configurations if the user hasn’t explicitly provided them. While this defaulting pattern is more consistent
with Kubernetes conventions for `spec` and `status` (and is also our only option in this situation), it's

> important to acknowledge that this inconsistency in defaulting behavior could cause confusion for users.

Reviewer 3: You should remove this section now, we simplified to remove the Ingress Config like you mentioned, so no relevance to EIPAllocations.

know what public subnets will be created by the openshift-installer.

To illustrate further, the workflow could start like:

Cluster admin wants to use EIPs, but isn't bringing their own VPC, so they need to know exactly how many EIPs to create.
Cluster admin should review https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/ to find out how many AZs are in the region they are installing into.
Cluster admin should use the same number of EIPs as AZs in their region.
Cluster admins probably know how many AZs they are installing into, but a workflow like this would provide a concrete example of how this would happen if they don't.

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

#### Set EIP using an installer:
1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds their domain, AWS region, and EIP allocation ids.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:
    region: <AWS region>

>     lbType: NLB

Reviewer 4: Does the installer have to validate the lbType is NLB when eipAllocations are specified? What happens when `lbType: Classic`?

Author: Yes we can check this. I will add a CEL.

>     networkLoadBalancer:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:
```
So it's not confused with the one created by the Installer.

Author: OK I will make that change.

Author: changes made

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A. This feature will be introduced as Tech Preview.

### Tech Preview -> GA

The E2E tests should be consistently passing and a PR will be created
to enable the feature gate by default.

### Removing a deprecated feature

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

No upgrade or downgrade concerns because all changes are compatible or in the installer.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A. This enhancement will only be supported for new installations and therefore has no version skew concerns.

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A.

## Support Procedures

CCM - Cloud  Controller Manager

- If the service is not getting updated with the EIP annotation and the kubernetes load balancer
  service is in `Pending` state then check the `cloud-controller-manager` logs and `IngressController` status.

In the CCM logs search for the `IngressController` name and check if you find any error related EIP allocation failure.
```sh
  oc logs <ccm pod name> -n openshift-cloud-controller-manager
```

In the `IngressController` status, check the status for the following:

> - Error messages for invalid eips or eips not present in the subnet of the VPC is `The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound:` for status type `LoadBalancerReady` and `Available`.

Reviewer 5: When this error occurs, does the Installation fail or can the user edit the `ingressNetworkLoadBalancer` list within the Ingress Config spec so that CCM can successfully reconcile the creation of the Ingress LB?

Author: @sadasu can you please check  point 3 under section ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Please let me know WYT.

Author: Also if an error is invoked we can either stop or ask for the correct input from user. i need to check the installer if we can add a loop.

Reviewer 5: > @sadasu can you please check point 3 under section ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints
> 
> Please let me know WYT.

@miheer OK with that section.
Probably out-of-scope for this enhancement, when Installer determines the predicted LB subnet count, would it useful for the Installer to pass the predicted LB subnets to the AWS CCM via a manifest? That way we will not be duplicating this logic of figuring out the correct subnets to use. /cc @patrickdillon @mtulio

Reviewer: > predicted LB subnets to the AWS CCM via a manifest? 

I am not sure if this would stick the solution to BYO VPC only, IIUC this EP can cover both managed and unmanaged VPC as it intents to deliver only BYO EIP.

This proposal will refer to the IngressController that gets created automatically during installation and handles
the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController.

### CCM 
CCM refers to Cloud Controller Manager which calls [AWS LoadBalancer Controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller) to create AWS LBs.

### Some more terminologies
EIP = AWS Elastic IP, NLB = AWS Network LoadBalancer, AZ = Availability Zone, LB = LoadBalancer

## Motivation

### User Stories
- As a cluster administrator using installer, I want to configure default NLB IngressController to use EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift on AWS (ROSA) using installer, I want to use static IPs (and therefore AWS Elastic IPs) so that
  I can configure appropriate firewall rules.
  I want the default AWS Load Balancer that they use (NLB) for their router to use these EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so
  that I can avoid Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses.

### Goals
- Users are able to use EIPs for a default NLB `IngressController` at install time.

> - Check for unassociated EIPs before passing to CCM.

Reviewer 3: Think we should make this more generic? Otherwise, you are missing a couple of validations here.
```suggestion
- Add validation to the installer to prevent invalid EIP configurations
```

type EIPAllocations struct {
    // ingressNetworkLoadBalancer is a list of IDs for Elastic IP (EIP) addresses that
    // are assigned to the default AWS NLB IngressController.
    // The following restrictions apply:
    //
    // eipAllocations can only be used with external scope, not internal.
    // An EIP can be allocated to only a single IngressController.
    // The number of EIP allocations must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
	// Each EIP allocation must be unique.
    // A maximum of 10 EIP allocations are permitted.
    //
    // See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html for general
    // information about configuration, characteristics, and limitations of Elastic IP addresses.
    //
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=InstallEIPForDefaultNLBIngressController
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x == y))`,message="eipAllocations cannot contain duplicates"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10

>     IngressNetworkLoadBalancer []EIPAllocation `json:"ingressNetworkLoadBalancer"`

Reviewer 2: Could the existing `PublicIpv4Pool` field be used instead to satisfy the requirements?

https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/694d083d3332bd5b892f0098a91be6c206b18fce/pkg/types/aws/platform.go#L119-L122

I think the answer is no, IIUC users want to setup firewall rules in advance, so they need to specify explicit IP addresses. A pool won't suffice. It may be worth drawing a distinctoin between your proposal and this existing field. Would be interested in @mtulio's take on this.

Reviewer: @patrickdillon is correct: No. Those are different use cases. The PublicIpv4Pool will provide a pool advertised to AWS (Public IP pool owned by the User) and the installer (CAPA) will allocate any IPs (EIPs) from that pool. The EIP proposal is requiring pre-allocated EIPs and presenting to the installer, where those can be consumed from any existing option: amazon-provided, user-pool (BYO Public IPv4), or customer-owner IP (CoIP/Outposts).

When this cap is hit you will get the following error: `Elastic IP address could not be allocated.
The maximum number of addresses has been reached.`
Elastic IP Allocation can only be done for internet-facing NLB.
If you are using an already available eipAllocation then it should be an `UnAssociated` one.

For installer-created-VPCs, a cluster admin can accurately predict how many EIPAllocations to bring so their cluster doesn't fail to install as follows as they might not 
know what public subnets will be created by the openshift-installer.

To illustrate further, the workflow could start like:

Cluster admin wants to use EIPs, but isn't bringing their own VPC, so they need to know exactly how many EIPs to create.
Cluster admin should review https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/ to find out how many AZs are in the region they are installing into.
Cluster admin should use the same number of EIPs as AZs in their region.
Cluster admins probably know how many AZs they are installing into, but a workflow like this would provide a concrete example of how this would happen if they don't.

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a

> cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

Author: OK

#### Set EIP using an installer:
1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds their domain, AWS region, and EIP allocation ids.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:
    region: <AWS region>
    lbType: NLB
    ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:
      eipAllocations:
      - eipalloc-1111
      - eipalloc-2222
      - eipalloc-3333
      - eipalloc-4444
      - eipalloc-5555 
...
```  

2. The installer will create the cluster ingress config object as follows:
```yaml
 oc edit ingress.config/cluster -o yaml
 ...
 apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
 kind: Ingress
 metadata:
...
   name: cluster
...
 spec:
   domain: apps.eip.devcluster.openshift.com
   loadBalancer:
     platform:
       aws:
         type: NLB
         eipAllocations:

>            ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:

Author: actually installer team has suggested this name as this is specific to ingress controller NLB and NLB can be set for different components by the installer in the future.

>            ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:

Reviewer 3: For the install-config, yes, but this is the IngressConfig, there isn't a `ingressNetworkLoadBalancer` field.

My original suggestion is a little off, it should be:

```suggestion
           networkLoadBalancerParameters:
             eipAllocations:
```

>            ingressNetworkLoadBalancer:

Author: sorry my bad got it.

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

1. #### Set EIP through installer for the default IngressController:
    1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
    2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`.
    3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default `IngressController` by:
        1. creating an default `IngressController` CR.
        2. then scaling a deployment for the `IngressController` CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the
           ingress cluster object.
        3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
           which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of `IngressController` CR.

2. #### Validation on installer when installing in managed VPC (full-automated) based in the discovered zones used to create the cluster.

>      We will be comparing the number of Availability Zones in the region to the number of eipAllocations passed in the `install-config.yaml`.

Author: OK

3. #### Validation on installer when installing in unmanaged (BYO VPC)
     We will be comparing if the number of public subnets added to the install-config matches with len(eipAllocations).
     However, The problem is that the AWS CCM can select subnets that aren't provided in the BYO Subnets, see https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432.
Here's one recommended option:

The Installer should count all LB subnets by predicting what subnets be chosen by the AWS CCM 

> (i.e. any subnet without another cluster's kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag). 

Author: OK

We can call this Predicted LB Subnet Count.

> We can examine the following scenarios:

Reviewer 4: Can `Predicted LB Subnet count` < `BYO Subnet count`? If not, these are the possible scenarios:
1. `EIP Allocations count < BYO Subnet count`: error
2. `EIP Allocations count < Predicted LB Subnet count`: error

Is is an issue if extra `EIP Allocations` are supplied?

Author: the count of eip allocation should exactly match the number of subnets. It can't be less or greater than and must be equal to.

> ##### BYO Subnet Count != EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count == Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count != EIPs Allocations:

Reviewer 3: We might be able to eliminate all of this complex validation if:
- We agree to simplify the new subnets API (https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634#discussion_r1814219682)
- EIP Allocations waits for new subnet API to be available and is dependent on it 

But it's a tough call. Maybe we have to do this validation in the beginning so you release EIP Allocations, but when the new subnets [API](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634) comes out, you can get rid of all of this complexity. I think that would be a massive win as far as a maintenance burden.

I would keep this validation here for now, but I will let you know if there are any updates.

Throw a error that says something to the extend of that the LB will select more subnets and the cluster will fail:
Or though the number of EIP Allocations equals the number of provided Subnets, it does not equal the number of Subnets that will be selected by
the LoadBalancer and the cluster will fail, please review the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> subnet tags are set correctly.

##### BYO Subnet Count != EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count != Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count == EIPs Allocations:

This is an odd scenario. The user got the # of a EIPs == Predicted LB Subnet count, I suppose because they anticipated the AWS CCM's generous 
selection of subnets. This is valid scenario for no error message.

##### BYO Subnet Count == EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count == Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count == EIPs Allocations:

Obvious valid scenario.

I think we need some feedback from installer-team, @patrickdillon or @mtulio or @sadasu on this type of validation. Should the installer team consider
the Predicted LB Subnets != BYO Subnet Count scenario as not valid? And possibly block future installs as a resolution

> to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432? That would make EIP Allocation a lot easier, but not sure if that's realistic. 

Reviewer 2: OCPBUGS-17432 is closed, but I believe the problem is not actually resolved until RFE-1717 is implemented, correct?

Are you proposing enforcing this validation only when EIP allocations are specified? I'm certainly open to that. If we do it in all cases (i.e. when EIP allocations are not specified) that might be more tricky, as the install config that "worked" before, now starts failing...

But in the case of EIP Allocations, this is new functionality so we won't break any existing workflows. If we did throw a validation error when EIP Allocation Count != Predicted LB Subnets, then users would be able to resolve the issue on their own, right? Say by adding the unmanaged tag to other subnets in the VPC...

Author: @gcs278 ^^ WDYT ?

Reviewer 3: > OCPBUGS-17432 is closed, but I believe the problem is not actually resolved until RFE-1717 is implemented, correct?

Correct. It was closed as "not a bug", but I do think it could still be considered a bug, or at least, it's confusing UX that has lead to other RFEs like https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-2816, and it was the reason why Service Delivery opened the subnet RFE https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-1717 in the first place. Everything comes back to OCPBUGS-17432...

> Are you proposing enforcing this validation only when EIP allocations are specified?

Right. Doing it in all cases, would be something I could implement in the subnets EP https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634.

> If we do it in all cases (i.e. when EIP allocations are not specified) that might be more tricky, as the install config that "worked" before, now starts failing...

Yes, in the context of this EP, but I don't think that applies if we deprecate and add a new `subnetConfig` field like the suggestion in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634. Behavior can change since customers have to explicitly opt into the new field. I've recently realized this and [suggested](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634#discussion_r1814219682) as a improvement in UX with making this new field. My suggestion, rather than error out when the subnet counts aren't equal, is to just make Cluster Subnets == IngressController subnets (and completely bypass the AWS CCM subnet discovery logic). But this is a discussion for that EP, so feel free to jump in there.

> If we did throw a validation error when EIP Allocation Count != Predicted LB Subnets, then users would be able to resolve the issue on their own, right? Say by adding the unmanaged tag to other subnets in the VPC...

Right.

Reviewer 6: Or why not mark the operator as Degraded until the issue is straightened out by the admin?

> 4. #### Validation to check if EIPs are not already assigned to resources.

Reviewer 3: What about if the EIP exists? I don't think you explicitly mention that in these sections.

Author: i made this change 
4. #### Validation to check if EIPs exist and are not already assigned to resources.

EIPs can be assigned to many resource types, like Nat Gateways, *LBs, Instances, etc. The attribute associationId will be set when the EIP is already associated.
To mitigate this we could add that validation, at least on installer, to provide quick-feedback (fail when validate install-config) to the user when the provided EIP is already associated to another resource.
It would be nice to have a validation before setting the annotation to CCM, keeping the operator degraded before disrupting the service.

> 

Reviewer 3: Could we add a small section on the defaulting mechanics for the IngressController? It's definitely an implementation detail, but an important one that feels important enough to mention here. Something @Miciah  or @JoelSpeed might be interested in commenting on. I wonder if doing status "right" was a bit of a mistake, because now things are becoming inconsistent in the API. Either way, that that ship sailed in 4.17.

```suggestion
#### IngressConfig EIP Allocation Defaulting Mechanics for Ingress Controller

Traditionally, the Ingress Operator has populated default values from the Ingress Config into the `status`, making `status` effectively reflect the desired state of the IngressController. However, since `eipAllocations` in `status` represents the **actual** state, not the **desired** state, the default `eipAllocations` values must be set in the `spec` when the Ingress Operator initially admits the IngressController.

This approach is new. The Ingress Operator does not typically set default values in `spec` for load balancer configurations if the user hasn’t explicitly provided them. While this defaulting pattern is more consistent with Kubernetes conventions for `spec` and `status` (and is also our only option in this situation), it's important to acknowledge that this inconsistency in defaulting behavior could cause confusion for users.
```

Reviewer 5: @gcs278 @miheer if we were to make all the `status` fields of the Ingress Config consistent and populate them with the **actual** state, is the issue that there is no field that reflects the defaults?

Author: IngressConfig is no longer relevant.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Providing a right number of EIPs same as the number of public subnets as per AWS guidelines is an admin
  responsibility.
- Also providing existing available EIPs which are not assigned to any instance is important.
- If the above two points are not followed, the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the IngressController
  won't get assigned EIPs, which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in persistently pending state by the
  Cloud Controller Manager (CCM). The reason for the persistently pending state is posted to the status of the IngressController.
  As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

### Drawbacks

## Open Questions
- Q: As per [EP](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634), old subnets field will be deprecated. So, shall we skip the validation for checking

>   number of `BYO Subnets` provided in the `install-config.yaml` with the number of eipAllocations ? Or shall we compare the old subnets field with the eipAllocations ?

Reviewer 3: I'm 50/50 on doing validation. It's going to be painful to write and maintain, but also it sucks when I install a cluster and realize 45 minutes later that I didn't add enough EIPs. Instant feedback is much better, as long as we get it right.

Like I said in another comment, I'm pushing for a simplification in the new subnets field, where this whole "predicited LB subnet count" goes away. IF that's introduced, validation will be trivial `len(subnets) == len(eips)`. I yield to the installer team on this one.

Author: @patrickdillon @mtulio ^^

> 

Reviewer 3: Mind adding one more that I'm curious about? CC: @JoelSpeed 
```suggestion
- Q: Should we split Ingress Config into defaulting for the default IngressController and defaulting for user-created IngressControllers?
```

---
title: aws-lb-eip-selection
authors:
- "@miheer"
reviewers:
- "@gcs278"
- "@alebedev87"
- "@Miciah"
- "@mtulio"
- "@candita"
- "@frobware"
- "@rfredette"
approvers:
- "@patrickdillon"
- "@mtulio"
- "@r4f4"
- "@sadasu"
api-approvers:
- None
creation-date: 2024-09-26
last-updated: 2024-10-28
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CORS-3687
see-also:
  - ""
replaces:
  - ""
superseded-by:
---

# Installer LoadBalancer EIP Selection for AWS

## Summary

This enhancement extends the OpenShift Installer's install-config, enabling cluster admins to
configure EIPs for AWS NLB load balancer created for their `default` NLB IngressController at install time.

## Definitions and Terminology

### The `default` IngressController

This proposal will refer to the IngressController that gets created automatically during installation and handles

> the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController.

Reviewer 6: Can you mention whether this feature makes the installation a UPI (user-provisioned) rather than IPI installation?

For example, will the configuration settings be listed in the parameter docs:
https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/installing/installing_aws/installation-config-parameters-aws.html#installation-config-parameters-aws

Author: i made some modification :
This proposal will refer to the IngressController that gets created automatically during user provisioned installation and handles
the platform routes (console, auth, canary, etc.) as the `default` IngressController.

}

// EIPAllocations contains Elastic IP (EIP) allocations for AWS resources 
// within the cluster.
type EIPAllocations struct {
    // ingressNetworkLoadBalancer is a list of IDs for Elastic IP (EIP) addresses that
    // are assigned to the default AWS NLB IngressController.
    // The following restrictions apply:
    //
    // eipAllocations can only be used with external scope, not internal.
    // An EIP can be allocated to only a single IngressController.
    // The number of EIP allocations must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
	// Each EIP allocation must be unique.
    // A maximum of 10 EIP allocations are permitted.
    //
    // See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html for general
    // information about configuration, characteristics, and limitations of Elastic IP addresses.
    //
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=InstallEIPForDefaultNLBIngressController
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x == y))`,message="eipAllocations cannot contain duplicates"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10

>     IngressNetworkLoadBalancer []EIPAllocation `json:"ingressNetworkLoadBalancer"`

Reviewer 6: Is `IngressNetworkLoadBalancer` an existing field name? If it's a new name, it doesn't seem suitable to describe a list of EIP allocations.

Author: This name was already discussed with the installer team. I am not able to find the thread.

   from the cluster ingress config object.

#### Updating the default IngressController's EIPs after installation:

The cluster-admin will need to update the eipAllocations in `IngressConfig` and then delete the `default IngressController`. 
The cluster-ingress-operator will create a new `default IngressController` with the newly updated eipAllocations.

### API Extensions

This proposal doesn't add any API extensions other than the new field proposed in
[IngressConfig API Updates](#ingressconfig-api-updates).

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes
Currently, there is no unique consideration for making this change work with Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters
This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> 1. #### Set EIP through installer for the default IngressController:

Reviewer 6: The numbers 1 - 6 scattered through this section aren't helpful.  It makes it seem like an ordered list of steps.  I suggest using the `#` formatting to distinguish sections and subsections.  All the Validation subsections belong in one section entitled "Field Validation".

> 1. #### Set EIP through installer for the default IngressController:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. #### Configuring EIP for the default IngressController at installation time:
```

Also, the numbers 1 - 6 scattered through this section aren't helpful.  It makes it seem like an ordered list of steps.  I suggest using the `#` formatting to distinguish sections and subsections.

Author: I don't see numbers

    1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
    2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`.
    3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a `default` `IngressController` by:
        1. creating an `default` `IngressController` CR.
        2. then scaling a deployment for the `IngressController` CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the
           ingress cluster object.
        3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
           which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of `IngressController` CR.

> 2. #### Validation on installer when installing in managed VPC (full-automated) based in the discovered zones used to create the cluster.

Reviewer 6: All the Validation subsections belong in one section entitled "Field Validation".

I'm not exactly sure what you mean here, but maybe this:
```suggestion
#### Field Validation
##### The number of Availability Zones much match the number of `eipAllocations`

The installer must ensure this when installing in managed VPC (full-automated).  It can compare the number of `eipAllocations` to the discovered zones.
```

Author: Added Field Validation

     We will be comparing the number of Availability Zones in the region to the number of eipAllocations passed in the `install-config.yaml` because the cluster will select 1 subnet per AZ, and the number of EIPs must be equal to subnets..

> 3. #### Validation on installer when installing in unmanaged (BYO VPC)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
##### The number of public subnets must match the number of `eipAllocations` in an unmanaged VPC (BYO VPC)
```

     We will be comparing if the number of public subnets added to the install-config matches with len(eipAllocations).

>      However, The problem is that the AWS CCM can select subnets that aren't provided in the BYO Subnets, see https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432.

Author: this part has been removed.

> Here's one recommended option:

Reviewer 6: I think you have to call this out and commit to it as a **solution** or omit it and find some other way.  
```suggestion
The solution is
```

Author: This part has been removed.

> The Installer should count all LB subnets by predicting what subnets be chosen by the AWS CCM 

Reviewer 5: I realize that I am going beyond the scope of this feature, but would it be efficient if we did this operation to predict LB count once during install. Would it make sense for the Installer to come up with this list of predicted LB subnet count and make it available to AWS CCM via some manifest? /cc @patrickdillon @mtulio

(i.e. any subnet without another cluster's kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> tag and the load balancer is not external and the subnet is not private). 

> We can call this Predicted LB Subnet Count.

Author: The predicted part has been removed from this EP.

We can examine the following scenarios:

##### BYO Subnet Count != EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count == Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count != EIPs Allocations:

Throw a simple error that just says, EIP != Provided Subnets:

> The number of EIP Allocations does not equal the number of provided Subnets, the cluster will fail.

Reviewer 6: I believe the pattern is to update a cluster operator status as Degraded while the counts don't match.  Then the cluster would fail after a timeout for that degraded operator.  The admin can get a chance to correct the situation with a proper error message.  cc @wking, who might have ideas about this.

> ##### BYO Subnet Count == EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count != Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count != EIPs Allocations:

Reviewer 6: Why do we even have to check any further if the BYO Subnet Count matches the eipAllocation count?

Author: prediction part has been removed.

Throw a error that says something to the extend of that the LB will select more subnets and the cluster will fail:
Or though the number of EIP Allocations equals the number of provided Subnets, it does not equal the number of Subnets that will be selected by
the LoadBalancer and the cluster will fail, please review the kubernetes.io/cluster/<cluster-id> subnet tags are set correctly.

##### BYO Subnet Count != EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count != Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count == EIPs Allocations:

> This is an odd scenario. The user got the # of a EIPs == Predicted LB Subnet count, I suppose because they anticipated the AWS CCM's generous 
> selection of subnets. This is valid scenario for no error message.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is a valid scenario. The user managed to match the number of EIPs to the Predicted LB Subnet count.
```

Author: prediction part has been removed

##### BYO Subnet Count == EIPs Allocations && BYO Subnet Count == Predicted LB Subnet count && Predicted LB Subnet count == EIPs Allocations:

> Obvious valid scenario.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is a valid scenario.
```

Author: prediction part has been removed.

I think we need some feedback from installer-team, @patrickdillon or @mtulio or @sadasu on this type of validation. Should the installer team consider
the Predicted LB Subnets != BYO Subnet Count scenario as not valid? And possibly block future installs as a resolution
to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432? That would make EIP Allocation a lot easier, but not sure if that's realistic. 

> 4. #### Validation to check if EIPs exist and are not already assigned to resources.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
##### Ensure that EIPs exist and are not already assigned.
```

> EIPs can be assigned to many resource types, like Nat Gateways, *LBs, Instances, etc. The attribute associationId will be set when the EIP is already associated.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
EIPs can be assigned to many resource types, like NAT gateways, load balancers, instances, etc. The attribute `associationId` will be set when the EIP is already assigned.
```

Author: actually associated is the right word so will just keep it rest I will follow your suggestion.

To mitigate this we could add that validation, at least on installer, to provide quick-feedback (fail when validate install-config) to the user when the provided EIP is already associated to another resource.

> It would be nice to have a validation before setting the annotation to CCM, keeping the operator degraded before disrupting the service.

Reviewer 6: This is an implmentation discussion. Couldn't you proactively declare that you will update the operator status, rather than mentioning it would be nice to have?  If it's out of scope, then say it's out of scope.
```suggestion
It would be nice to have a validation before setting the annotation to CCM, keeping the operator Degraded before disrupting the service.
```

> 5. #### IngressConfig EIP Allocation Defaulting Mechanics for Ingress Controller

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### IngressConfig EIP Allocation Defaulting Mechanics for Ingress Controller
```

Traditionally, the Ingress Operator has populated default values from the Ingress Config into the `status`, 
making `status` effectively reflect the desired state of the IngressController. However, since 
`eipAllocations` in `status` represents the **actual** state, not the **desired** state, the default 
`eipAllocations` values must be set in the `spec` when the Ingress Operator initially admits the 
IngressController.
This approach is new. The Ingress Operator does not typically set default values in `spec` for load balancer

> configurations if the user hasn’t explicitly provided them. While this defaulting pattern is more consistent

Reviewer 6: The admin user has explicitly provided them, as a part of the installation config.

with Kubernetes conventions for `spec` and `status` (and is also our only option in this situation), it's
important to acknowledge that this inconsistency in defaulting behavior could cause confusion for users.

> 6. #### Validation to check if lbType was to NLB when eipAllocations were provided in the installer

Reviewer 5: Nit
```suggestion
6. #### Validation to check if lbType was set to NLB when eipAllocations were provided in the installer
```

> 6. #### Validation to check if lbType was to NLB when eipAllocations were provided in the installer
> EIPs can provided only for `NLB` type `IngressController` so, the installer will be check for the lbType set to NLB when `eipAllocations` are provided
> in the `install-config.yaml`. We can't add a CEL in the Platform API type of the installer so a validation will need to be
> added in the installer code.

Reviewer 6: This section should be moved up to the "Validation" section.  

Also, you didn't mention CEL in any other part of the proposal.  Can you explain why we can't use CEL to validate this or other things, in a section at the beginning of the Implementation Details?  

```suggestion
##### Ensure `lbType` is set to NLB when `eipAllocations` are configured at install-time
EIPs are valid only for an `NLB` type `IngressController`.   We can't add a CEL in the Platform API type of the installer so this validation will happend in the installer code.
```

Author: We are not using CEL but we have added the logic in the installer code.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Providing a right number of EIPs same as the number of public subnets as per AWS guidelines is an admin
  responsibility.
- Also providing existing available EIPs which are not assigned to any instance is important.
- If the above two points are not followed, the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the IngressController
  won't get assigned EIPs, which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in persistently pending state by the

>   Cloud Controller Manager (CCM). The reason for the persistently pending state is posted to the status of the IngressController.

Reviewer 6: You mean Degraded state, right?

Author: The Degradation happens after sometime. Initially we see Pending state.

  As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

### Drawbacks

## Open Questions
- Q: As per [EP](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634), old subnets field will be deprecated. So, shall we skip the validation for checking
  number of `BYO Subnets` provided in the `install-config.yaml` with the number of eipAllocations ? Or shall we compare the old subnets field with the eipAllocations ?

> - Q: Should we split Ingress Config into defaulting for the default IngressController and defaulting for user-created IngressControllers?

Reviewer 6: This is not relevant to this feature though, right?  Because this feature is only for the default IC.

Author: removing it as we no longer use Ingress config

Author: I have kept it but added a answer.

```sh
  oc logs <ccm pod name> -n openshift-cloud-controller-manager
```

In the `IngressController` status, check the status for the following:
- Error messages for invalid eips or eips not present in the subnet of the VPC is `The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound:` for status type `LoadBalancerReady` and `Available`.
- Error messages when the number of EIP provided and the number of subnets of VPC ID don't match is `The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: Must have same number of EIP AllocationIDs (4) and SubnetIDs (5)` for status type `LoadBalancerReady` and `Available`.
- Check the status of `IngressController` controller for LoadBalancer which is LoadBalancerReady, LoadBalancerProgressing, Available.

```sh
  oc get ingresscontroller <ingresscontroller name> -o yaml
```

## Alternatives

## Infrastructure Needed

> This EP works in AWS environment as AWS EIPs work on AWS environment only.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Because EIPs are AWS objects, this proprosal is valid only for the AWS environment.
```
